text/more-cements.md, before:

I’ve been thinking more about chemical reactions that can produce
inorganic solids that are hard and/or strong and/or refractory from
conveniently shapable precursors.  Previously I was mostly thinking of
things that react in aqueous solution, but now I’ve also been thinking
about granular substances you could mold into shape (in some kind of
carrier, such as a thermoset resin) and then heat up to activate the
reaction.

In Dercuano in file `berlinite-gel` I mentioned Grover et al.’s
low-temperature synthesis of alumina ceramics bonded by berlinite
(aluminum orthophosphate) by partly dissolving alumina in aqueous 50
wt% phosphoric acid at 130° (with a 5:1 weight ratio of alumina to
phosphoric acid) for 1–4 days, then heating the resulting a thick
puttylike gel of hydrated aluminum phosphate to only 150° for 1–3 days
to get a 20%-porosity solid of nearly 50 MPa compressive strength.
Similar substances (“MALP” or “MAP”) are widely sold as castable
refractories.

With respect to adding phosphate cross-linkers, the ammonium
phosphates should not be overlooked; some are deliquescent under
ordinary conditions, easily dehydrated to crystallinity with gentle
heating, and yield phosphoric acid when the ammonia is driven off with
stronger heating.

A different way to get phosphates of aluminum might be to react
[sodium aluminate][4], easily prepared by digesting aluminum in lye,
with a soluble phosphate, such as one of the phosphates of sodium or
ammonium.  WP says sodium aluminate is thus used to precipitate
soluble phosphates in water treatment plants.

[4]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sodium_aluminate

Sources of aluminum may be other useful bonding agents; water-soluble
sodium aluminate precipitates aluminum hydroxide in water upon
cooling, part of the Bayer process; even the insoluble hydroxide
itself may serve as a useful bonding agent due to its tendency to form
a metastable hydrogel which eventually crystallizes.  Calcining the
hydroxide yields sapphire.

Aluminates of calcium are also potentially interesting, especially for
3-D printing; the highly reactive [tricalcium aluminate][5] is
notorious for causing “flash setting” of concrete immediately upon
hydration, though a small amount of sulfate can prevent this.  WP
says:

> Water reacts instantly with tricalcium aluminate. Hydration likely
> begins already during grinding of cement clinker due to residual
> humidity and dehydration of gypsum additives. Initial contact with
> water causes protonation of single bonded oxygen atoms on aluminate
> rings and leads to the formation of calcium hydroxide.[4] The next
> steps in the sequence of the hydration reaction involve the
> generated hydroxide ions as strong nucleophiles, which fully
> hydrolyze the ring structure in combination with water.

[5]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tricalcium_aluminate

But of course if you want to 3-D print a stone object by spraying
water onto a powder bed, this kind of instant setting may be highly
desirable, and tricalcium aluminate's other deleterious effects on
concrete may not be relevant.

My previous thought of precipitating calcium phosphate through a
double metathesis reaction still might work as a cement, even with
melting rather than in a solvent system.  It’s similarly fairly
instant.  I had settled on calcium chloride and agricultural
diammonium phosphate, and the thought at the time was an aqueous
reaction; but DAP decomposes to yield liquid phosphoric acid (and
other crap) at only 155°, which I think can attack the solid calcium
chloride (which melts at 772°).  Maybe it can also attack solid
metallic aluminum to get phosphates of aluminum.  Monoammonium
phosphate is cleaner, decomposing to yield only ammonia and phosphoric
acid at I think a slightly higher temperature.

[Reportedly you can react alumina with boria at 800°][0] or [600°–800°
or 1200°][3] and get the exotic aluminum borate, which [reportedly
sublimes at 1050°][1] or [above 1300°][3]; [reacting aqueous borax
with aluminum sulfate below 45°][2] reportedly gives aluminum borate
directly.  For Al₁₈B₄O₃₃, [Vickers hardness is reported as 6 GPa,
Young’s modulus 400 GPa, tensile strength 8 GPa (65% higher than
basalt fiber, 15% higher than carbon fiber, three times maraging
steel), Mohs hardness 7][3], crystal habit acicular, and the whiskers
have been used to strengthen aluminum.  There are a few different
aluminum borates or boron aluminates, though.

[0]: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19198315/
[1]: https://www.americanelements.com/aluminum-borate-11121-16-7
[2]: https://patents.google.com/patent/US3860692A/en
[3]: https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/pdf/10.1080/21870764.2018.1539209 "Densification of lightweight aluminum borate ceramics by direct sintering of milled powders, Hernández, Suárez, et al. 02018"

Commit message:

Add more notes on some materials stuff

text/more-cements.md, after:

I’ve been thinking more about chemical reactions that can produce
inorganic solids that are hard and/or strong and/or refractory from
conveniently shapable precursors.  Previously I was mostly thinking of
things that react in aqueous solution, but now I’ve also been thinking
about granular substances you could mold into shape (in some kind of
carrier, such as a thermoset resin) and then heat up to activate the
reaction.

In Dercuano in file `berlinite-gel` I mentioned Grover et al.’s
low-temperature synthesis of alumina ceramics bonded by berlinite
(aluminum orthophosphate) by partly dissolving alumina in aqueous 50
wt% phosphoric acid at 130° (with a 5:1 weight ratio of alumina to
phosphoric acid) for 1–4 days, then heating the resulting a thick
puttylike gel of hydrated aluminum phosphate to only 150° for 1–3 days
to get a 20%-porosity solid of nearly 50 MPa compressive strength.
Similar substances (“MALP” or “MAP”) are widely sold as castable
refractories.  (See file `cola-flavor.md` for more on this substance.)

With respect to adding phosphate cross-linkers, the ammonium
phosphates should not be overlooked; some are deliquescent under
ordinary conditions, easily dehydrated to crystallinity with gentle
heating, and yield phosphoric acid when the ammonia is driven off with
stronger heating.

An interesting benefit of phosphoric acid as a binder (or acid
phosphates like monoaluminum phosphate or monomagnesium phosphate) is
that it can bind silicates like soda-lime glass, but doesn’t destroy
them the way lye does.  Soda-lime glass fiber is only about US$3/kg,
according to file `refractories.md`, which is enormously cheaper than
any alternative fiber reinforcement of similar strength.  Maybe by
combining phosphoric acid, some kind of high-strength foam (see file
`glass-foam.md`) and oriented glass fiber, you could produce a
structure analogous to wood.  Space Shuttle TPS protective LI-900 HRSI
tiles were a felt of fused-quartz fibers, but they were adhered
together with, I think, borosilicate.

More discussion of such composite materials is in file
`fiberglass-cmc.md`.

A different way to get phosphates of aluminum might be to react
[sodium aluminate][4], easily prepared by digesting aluminum in lye,
with a soluble phosphate, such as one of the phosphates of sodium or
ammonium.  I seem to have had some success with this with fire; see file
`material-observations.md`, 02021-08-06.
WP says sodium aluminate is thus used to precipitate
soluble phosphates in water treatment plants.

[4]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sodium_aluminate

Sources of aluminum may be other useful bonding agents; water-soluble
sodium aluminate precipitates aluminum hydroxide in water upon
cooling, part of the Bayer process; even the insoluble hydroxide
itself may serve as a useful bonding agent due to its tendency to form
a metastable hydrogel which eventually crystallizes.  Calcining the
hydroxide yields sapphire.

Aluminates of calcium are also potentially interesting, especially for
3-D printing; the highly reactive [tricalcium aluminate][5] is
notorious for causing “flash setting” of concrete immediately upon
hydration, though a small amount of sulfate can prevent this.  WP
says:

> Water reacts instantly with tricalcium aluminate.  Hydration likely
> begins already during grinding of cement clinker due to residual
> humidity and dehydration of gypsum additives.  Initial contact with
> water causes protonation of single bonded oxygen atoms on aluminate
> rings and leads to the formation of calcium hydroxide.[4] The next
> steps in the sequence of the hydration reaction involve the
> generated hydroxide ions as strong nucleophiles, which fully
> hydrolyze the ring structure in combination with water.

[5]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tricalcium_aluminate

But of course if you want to 3-D print a stone object by spraying
water onto a powder bed, this kind of instant setting may be highly
desirable, and tricalcium aluminate's other deleterious effects on
concrete may not be relevant.

My previous thought of precipitating calcium phosphate through a
double metathesis reaction still might work as a cement, even with
melting rather than in a solvent system.  It’s similarly fairly
instant.  I had settled on calcium chloride and agricultural
diammonium phosphate, and the thought at the time was an aqueous
reaction; but DAP decomposes to yield liquid phosphoric acid (and
other crap) at only 155°, which I think can attack the solid calcium
chloride (which melts at 772°).  Maybe it can also attack solid
metallic aluminum to get phosphates of aluminum.  Monoammonium
phosphate is cleaner, decomposing to yield only ammonia and phosphoric
acid at I think a slightly higher temperature.

[Reportedly you can react alumina with boria at 800°][0] or [600°–800°
or 1200°][3] and get the exotic aluminum borate, which [reportedly
sublimes at 1050°][1] or [above 1300°][3]; [reacting aqueous borax
with aluminum sulfate below 45°][2] reportedly gives aluminum borate
directly.  For Al₁₈B₄O₃₃, [Vickers hardness is reported as 6 GPa,
Young’s modulus 400 GPa, tensile strength 8 GPa (65% higher than
basalt fiber, 15% higher than carbon fiber, three times maraging
steel), Mohs hardness 7][3], crystal habit acicular, and the whiskers
have been used to strengthen aluminum.  There are a few different
aluminum borates or boron aluminates, though.

[0]: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19198315/
[1]: https://www.americanelements.com/aluminum-borate-11121-16-7
[2]: https://patents.google.com/patent/US3860692A/en
[3]: https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/pdf/10.1080/21870764.2018.1539209 "Densification of lightweight aluminum borate ceramics by direct sintering of milled powders, Hernández, Suárez, et al. 02018"
